---
layout: post
category: Computer Stuff
tags: [vim,latex,programming]
---
## Intro
Originally I wanted to explain how to install support for the type
setting system [latex](http://www.latex-project.org/)
in the vastly superior text editor [vim](www.vim.org). The internet
tells you that this
comes in the form of a plugin called
[latex-vim](http://vim-latex.sourceforge.net/), so you need a plugin
manager for vim.

## Vim and Plugins
Once upon a time, people using vim had to simply copy their plugins
into the folder ~/.vim/.
This made management of plugins a pain in the ass, since it was
virtually impossible to remove already installed plugins or debug
plugins.
The story goes that some clever guys decided to write a plugin-manager for vim, which
is perversely another plugin. It is called pathogen and you need to
install it, before moving on to installing the plugins.

## How it really works
I found out, that all of this is a lie.
In all useful operating systems, you can simply install vim-latex with the
package manager of your choice. This is an easy and painless process.
In my case (Fedora 22), the plugins live somewhere in
/usr/share/vim/vimfiles. But in fact I do not care. All I care about
is, that it works.

So, why did it take me so long to install vim-latex? Because I
thought, that it did not work. I tried all the handy shortkeys from
the documentation and they did nothing. The problem was that vim did
not understand that I was in fact editing tex-files. He thought, that
the filetype was 'plaintex' instead of 'tex'.
Turns out, that there was a single line missing in my ~/.vimrc.

    let g:tex_flavor='latex'

With this, everything works. At least on my machine.
